<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XV: Mr. Sheringham Amuses an Ancient Rustic</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sheringham Amuses an Ancient Rustic</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>After the blazing sun and the dust, the cool bar of the old-fashioned little village inn, with its sanded floor and its brasses gleaming in the soft twilight, was remarkably welcome.</p>
			<p>Roger buried his nose thankfully in his tankard before getting to business.</p>
			<p>“My word, that’s good!” he observed in heartfelt tones to the landlord, setting the tankard down half empty on the polished counter. “There’s nothing like beer for thirst, is there?”</p>
			<p>“That’s true enough, sir,” replied the landlord heartily, both because it was good for trade and because he thoroughly believed it. “And you can’t have too much of it on a day like this, I’m thinking,” he added, with an eye to the former consideration.</p>
			<p>Roger looked about him appreciatively.</p>
			<p>“Nice little place you’ve got here.”</p>
			<p>“Not so bad, sir. There ain’t a better bar parlour within ten miles, though I say it as shouldn’t. You two gentlemen come far today?”</p>
			<p>“Elchester,” said Roger briefly. He did not wish to divulge the fact that he was staying at Layton Court, having no desire to waste time in parrying the stream of questions that would inevitably result from this information.</p>
			<p>“Ah, then, you would have a thirst on you and all,” the landlord remarked approvingly.</p>
			<p>“We have,” agreed Roger, finishing up the contents of his tankard, “so you can fill these up again for us.”</p>
			<p>The landlord replenished the tankards and leaned confidentially over the counter.</p>
			<p>“You heard the noos? There ain’t half been goings on round these parts this morning. Up at Layton Court. You’d pass it on the left coming from Elchester; nigh on a mile back. Gentleman shot hisself there, they say. The showver, ’e told me about it. Came in for a glass o’ beer, ’e did, same as what you two gentlemen might be doing now, an’ told me all about it. Wasn’t ’arf put out about it, ’e wasn’t. Wanted the day off tomorrow, an’ now he can’t ask for it, what with having to cart the police an’ everyone backwards and forwards an’ all.”</p>
			<p>Roger hurriedly subdued the involuntary smile that had risen to his lips on learning Albert’s personal view of the tragedy. It would have made a striking epitaph, he felt. “Sacred to the memory of John Brown, who died, greatly regretted by everybody, especially his chauffeur, who wanted the day off.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I did hear something about it,” he replied carelessly. “Shocking affair. And how do you find business round here?”</p>
			<p>“Mustn’t complain, I suppose,” said the landlord guardedly; “this bein’ the only public in the village, y’ see. An’ good drinkers they are round these parts, too,” he added with enthusiasm.</p>
			<p>“That’s fine. I like a man who can appreciate good beer when he gets it. And I suppose you get quite a few strangers in here from time to time as well?”</p>
			<p>“No, none too many,” said the landlord regretfully. “We lie a bit off the chief roads here, y’ see. Not but what a few walking gentlemen such as yourselves don’t drop in now and then, for all that.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I suppose you get a walking gentleman now and then,” Roger replied vaguely, wondering what exactly constituted a walking gentleman, and whether he was the opposite to a running gentleman. “How often would that be?”</p>
			<p>“Well, sir, that depends, don’t it?” said the landlord cautiously, evidently determined to be entrapped into no rash statements. “Yes, that depends.”</p>
			<p>“Does it? Well, take a special day. How many strangers came in yesterday, for instance?”</p>
			<p>“Lor’ bless you, sir, we don’t get ’em in like that; not so many in a day. In a month, more like. Why, I don’t suppose there’s been a stranger in this bar before you gents come in not for a matter o’ nearly a week.”</p>
			<p>“You don’t say!”</p>
			<p>“I do, sir,” retorted the landlord with much earnestness. “I do an’ all.”</p>
			<p>“Well, I should have thought you’d have got plenty in a cosy little place like this. Anyhow, you can be sure that I shall warn all my friends to come and pay you a visit if they happen to be in the neighbourhood. Better beer I’ve never tasted anywhere.”</p>
			<p>“It <em>is</em> good beer,” the landlord admitted, almost reluctantly. “Thank you kindly, sir. And anything I can do in return for you and your friends, I’m sure I’ll be most happy.”</p>
			<p>“Well, you can do something now, as a matter of fact,” Roger rejoined caressingly. “We’ve come over from Elchester to see Prince⁠—er John, you know. Up at Hillcrest Farm.”</p>
			<p>The landlord nodded. “Aye; I know.”</p>
			<p>“So if you could put us on the right road from here, we should be very grateful.”</p>
			<p>“Turn to the left when you get out of here and go straight on, sir,” returned the landlord promptly. “You can’t miss it. First farm on the right-’and side past the crossroads.”</p>
			<p>“Thanks very much. Let me see, I’ve never actually met Prince before, but he’s pretty easy to recognise, I understand. Big fellow, isn’t he?”</p>
			<p>“Aye, that ’e is. Matter o’ nigh on six feet from the top of his ’ead down; when he ’olds ’is ’ead up, that is.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, stoops a bit, does he?”</p>
			<p>“Well, you might call it that, sir. ’Angs ’is ’ead, in a manner of speakin’. You know ’ow they do.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes; quite. Strong chap, too, isn’t he?”</p>
			<p>“ ’E is, an’ all. It ’ud take all of six men to ’old him, if ’e did get rampageous.”</p>
			<p>“Pretty quiet usually, then, is he?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, aye. ’E’s quiet enough.”</p>
			<p>“But no fool, I gather. I mean, he’s pretty intelligent, isn’t he?”</p>
			<p>The landlord chuckled hoarsely. “Lor’ bless you, no. Prince ain’t no fool. ’E’s a clever devil, all right. Cunning, you might call ’im. Nor you wouldn’t be far wrong, neither.”</p>
			<p>“Oh? In what way?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, pretty nigh every way,” said the landlord vaguely. “But it’s a pity you two gents should have ’ad this walk out today. Prince was in Helchester ’isself yesterday.”</p>
			<p>“Oho!” observed Roger softly, with a side-glance at Alec. “He was, was he?”</p>
			<p>“Aye, at the Hagricultooral Show, ’e was.”</p>
			<p>“Oh? What was he doing there?”</p>
			<p>“Showin’.”</p>
			<p>“Showing himself, was he?”</p>
			<p>“Aye, that ’e was. An’ took a prize, too.”</p>
			<p>“What a pity we didn’t know that; it would have saved us a journey today. By the way, you don’t know what time he came back, do you? <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wetherby was there, too, I suppose?”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wetherby was there, but Prince didn’t come back with ’im. I see <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wetherby pass by ’ere on ’is mare soon after seven o’clock. Prince wouldn’t ’ave come till a deal later than that. But they’ll tell you up at the farm better nor I can about that.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, well, it isn’t really of the least importance, so long as I can see him up there now.”</p>
			<p>“He’s up there now right enough, sir. You ask any of the men up there an’ they’ll show you.”</p>
			<p>Roger finished up the remains of his beer and put the tankard down on the counter with a businesslike air.</p>
			<p>“Well, Alec,” he said briskly. “Time we were getting along if we’re ever to get back to Elchester today.”</p>
			<p>“You really are rather marvellous, you know, Roger,” Alec observed, as they set out along the road once more.</p>
			<p>“I know I am,” Roger said candidly. “But why particularly?”</p>
			<p>“Carrying on a chat with the landlord like that. I couldn’t have done it to save my life. I shouldn’t know what to say.”</p>
			<p>“I suppose it comes naturally,” Roger replied complacently. “I’m a bit of what our American friends call a mixer. As a matter of fact, I thoroughly enjoy a yap with somebody like that; friend William, for instance. And it all comes in useful, you know; local colour and so on. But what about the information I was able to extract, eh?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, we got a few more details, didn’t we?”</p>
			<p>“Highly important ones, too. What do you make of Master Prince showing on his own account at Elchester? That puts him in rather an independent position, doesn’t it? And he wasn’t back till late last night, you see. It all tallies.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, we seem to be on the right track this time.”</p>
			<p>“Of course we’re on the right track. How could we be anything else? The evidence is overwhelming. As a matter of fact,” Roger added thoughtfully, “I believe I can make a pretty good guess as to what actually happened last night.”</p>
			<p>“Oh? What?”</p>
			<p>“Why, friend Prince, naturally somewhat elated at winning a prize at the show, got drinking with some of the new pals he must have picked up here and had a couple of drops too much. On his way back he passes Layton Court and either rattles the side door and notices it ajar; in any case, walks in and up to the French windows, which are open. Stanworth, who we know was mortally afraid of him, jumps at his appearance and threatens him with a revolver. In the struggle, Stanworth is shot, either on purpose or accidentally. That sobers friend Prince up more than a little, and, with the cunning we know him to possess, he sets the stage for us to find the next morning. How’s that?”</p>
			<p>“It’s quite possible,” Alec admitted. “But what I want to know is⁠—how are we going to tackle Prince now?”</p>
			<p>“Wait and see what happens. I shall get into conversation with him and try to get him to account for his movements last night. If he gets obstreperous, we shall simply have to lay him out; that’s all. You’ll come in useful there, by the way.”</p>
			<p>“Humph!” Alec observed.</p>
			<p>“In any case,” Roger concluded enthusiastically, “it’s going to be dashed exciting. You can take my word for that.”</p>
			<p>There was no mistaking Hillcrest Farm. It lay on the top of a sharp rise just as the landlord had described it. The two instinctively slackened their steps as they approached, as if unconsciously reconnoitring the scene of battle.</p>
			<p>“I don’t want to enlist Wetherby just yet,” Roger murmured. “I think we ought to try and tackle him ourselves. And we don’t want to give the alarm in any case, or arouse any suspicions. That’s why I didn’t put hundreds more questions to that landlord. What do you think?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, absolutely. What about asking that old chap if he knows where Prince is?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I will.” Roger strolled over towards the spot where an ancient rustic was clipping one of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wetherby’s hedges. “I want to speak to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Prince,” he confided to the ancient. “Can you tell me where I shall find him?”</p>
			<p>“Sir?” queried the other, curving a large and horny hand round an equally large and horny ear.</p>
			<p>“I want to speak to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Prince,” Roger repeated loudly. “Where is he?”</p>
			<p>The ancient did not move. “Sir?” he remarked stolidly.</p>
			<p>“Prince!” bawled Roger. “Where?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, <em>Prince</em>! ’E’s in the next field alongside. Up ’tother end I seed ’im last, not above five minutes back.”</p>
			<p>The horny palm ceased to function as an ear-trumpet and became a receptacle for a spare shilling of Roger’s, and the two moved on. In the side of the next field was set a sturdy gate. Roger swung himself easily over it, the light of battle in his eyes. Alec followed suit, and they advanced together up the centre of the field.</p>
			<p>“I can’t see anyone here, can you?” Roger remarked, when they had gone some little distance. “Perhaps he’s gone somewhere else.”</p>
			<p>“Nothing but a cow in that corner. Is there any other way out of the field? He didn’t get over that gate into the road within the last five minutes. We should have seen him.”</p>
			<p>Roger halted and gazed round carefully. “Yes, there’s a⁠⸺ Hullo! What’s the matter with that cow? She seems very interested in us.”</p>
			<p>The cow, a large, powerful-looking animal, had indeed quitted its corner and was advancing purposefully in their direction. Its head was swaying curiously from side to side and it was emitting a noise not unlike the hoot of a steamer.</p>
			<p>“My God!” Alec shouted suddenly. “That isn’t a cow; it’s a bull! Run like hell!”</p>
			<p>Roger needed no second invitation; he set off at top speed in the wake of the flying Alec. The bull, observing this disappointing procedure, thundered after them. It was an exciting race while it lasted.</p>
			<p>The result, some six seconds later, was as follows:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<ol>
					<li>
						<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">A.</abbr> Grierson</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">R.</abbr> Sheringham</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Bull.</p>
					</li>
				</ol>
				<p>Distance between first and second, ten yards; between second and third, one five-barred gate (taken by the second in his stride).</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“ ’Strewth!” Roger observed with feeling, and collapsed incontinently into a ditch.</p>
			<p>A hoarse and grating noise caused them to look up. The noise emanated from the ancient. He was laughing.</p>
			<p>“Nearly ’ad you that time, gents,” he croaked joyfully. “Ain’t seen him go fer anyone like that not since he went fer that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stanfoerth, or whatever ’e calls ’isself⁠—’im from Layton Court. I ought to ’ave warned ’ee. You want ter be very careful o’ that there Prince John.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
