<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVII: Mr. Grierson Becomes Heated</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-17" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Grierson Becomes Heated</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>But however much Jefferson might guess of their activities, certainly nothing was visible in his manner as Roger and Alec entered the drawing room, twenty minutes late for tea. He greeted them in his usual curt, rather brusque way, and asked casually how they had managed to amuse themselves. Lady Stanworth was not present, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant was seated behind the tea tray.</p>
			<p>“Oh, we went for a stroll through the village; but it was too hot to be pleasant. Thanks, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant. Yes, milk and sugar, please. Two lumps. You got through your business in Elchester all right? I saw you starting.”</p>
			<p>“Yes. Got off infernally late. Had to rush things. However, I managed to get everything done all right.”</p>
			<p>“Have they arranged about the inquest yet, by the way?” Alec asked suddenly.</p>
			<p>“Yes. Tomorrow morning at eleven, here.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, they’re going to hold it here, are they?” said Roger. “Which room will you put them in? The library?”</p>
			<p>“No. I think the morning room’s better.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I think it is.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I do wish it were over!” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant remarked with an involuntary sigh.</p>
			<p>“You don’t seem to be looking forward to the ordeal,” Roger said quickly, with a slight smile.</p>
			<p>“I hate the idea of giving evidence,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant replied, almost passionately. “It’s horrible!”</p>
			<p>“Oh, come. It isn’t as bad as all that. It’s not like a law case, you know. There’ll be no cross-examination, or anything like that. The proceedings will be purely formal, I take it, eh, Jefferson?”</p>
			<p>“Purely,” Jefferson said, lighting a cigarette with deliberation. “Don’t suppose the whole thing will last more than twenty minutes.”</p>
			<p>“So you see there won’t be anything very dreadful in it, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant. May I have another cup of tea, please?”</p>
			<p>“Well, I wish it were over; that’s all,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant said with a nervous little laugh, and Roger noticed that the hand which held his cup shook slightly.</p>
			<p>Jefferson rose to his feet.</p>
			<p>“Afraid I shall have to leave you chaps to your own resources again,” he remarked abruptly. “Lady Stanworth hopes you’ll do whatever you like. Sorry to appear so inhospitable, but you know what things are like at this sort of time.”</p>
			<p>He walked out of the room.</p>
			<p>Roger decided to put out a small feeler.</p>
			<p>“Jefferson doesn’t seem extraordinarily upset really, does he?” he said to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant. “Yet it must be rather a shock to lose an employer, with whom one’s been so many years, in this tragic way.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant glanced at him, as if rather questioning the good taste of this remark. “I don’t think Major Jefferson is the sort of man to show his real feelings before comparative strangers, do you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sheringham?” she replied a little stiffly.</p>
			<p>“Probably not,” Roger replied easily. “But he seems singularly unperturbed about it all.”</p>
			<p>“He is a very imperturbable sort of person, I imagine.”</p>
			<p>Roger tried another tack. “Had you known <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stanworth long, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant?” he asked conversationally, leaning back in his chair and pulling his pipe out of his pocket. “You don’t mind if I smoke, do you?”</p>
			<p>“Please do. Oh, no; not very long. My⁠—my husband knew him, you know.”</p>
			<p>“I see. A curious habit that of his, asking comparative, or, in my case at any rate, complete strangers down to these little gatherings, wasn’t it?”</p>
			<p>“I think <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stanworth was a very hospitable man,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant replied tonelessly.</p>
			<p>“Very! A most excellent fellow in every way, didn’t you think?” Roger asked with enthusiasm.</p>
			<p>“Oh, most,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant in a curiously flat voice.</p>
			<p>Roger glanced at her shrewdly. “You don’t agree with me, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant?” he said suddenly.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant started.</p>
			<p>“I?” she said hurriedly. “Why, of course I do. I thought <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stanworth a⁠—a very nice man indeed. Charming! Of course I agree with you.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I’m sorry. I thought for the moment that you didn’t seem very enthusiastic about him. No earthly reason why you should be, of course. Everybody has their likes and dislikes, don’t they?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant glanced quickly at Roger, and then looked out of the window. “I was simply thinking how⁠—how tragic the whole thing is,” she said in a low voice.</p>
			<p>There was a short silence.</p>
			<p>“Lady Stanworth didn’t seem to be on very good terms with him, though, did she?” Roger remarked carelessly, prodding at the tobacco in his pipe with a match-stalk.</p>
			<p>“Do you think so?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant returned guardedly.</p>
			<p>“She certainly gave me that impression. In fact, I should have gone farther. I should have said that she positively disliked him.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant looked at the speaker with distaste. “There are secrets in every household, I suppose,” she said shortly. “Don’t you think that it is a little impertinent for outsiders to probe into them? Especially under circumstances like these.”</p>
			<p>“That’s one for me,” Roger smiled, quite unabashed. “Yes, I suppose it is, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant. The trouble is, you see, that I simply can’t help it. I’m the most curious person alive. Everything interests me, especially every human thing, and I’ve just got to get to the bottom of it. And you must admit that the relations between Lady Stanworth, of all people, and the⁠—shall we say?⁠—somewhat plebeian <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stanworth, are uncommonly interesting to a novelist.”</p>
			<p>“Everything is ‘copy’ to you, you mean?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant retorted, though less uncompromisingly. “Well, if you put it like that I suppose you may have a certain amount of reason; though I don’t admit the justification for all that. Yes, I believe Lady Stanworth did not get on very well with her brother-in-law. After all, it’s only to be expected, isn’t it?”</p>
			<p>“Is it?” asked Roger quickly. “Why?”</p>
			<p>“Well, because of the circumstances of⁠—” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant broke off abruptly and bit her lip. “Because of the blood and water idea, I suppose. They were utterly unlike each other in every way.”</p>
			<p>“That isn’t what you were going to say. What had you got in mind when you corrected yourself?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant flushed slightly.</p>
			<p>“Really, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sheringham, I⁠—”</p>
			<p>Alec rose suddenly from his chair. “I say, it’s awfully hot in this room,” he remarked abruptly. “Come into the garden and get some air, Roger, I’m sure <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant will excuse us.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant flashed a grateful look at him.</p>
			<p>“Certainly,” she said, in somewhat agitated tones. “I⁠—I think I shall go upstairs and lie down for a little myself. I have rather a headache.”</p>
			<p>The two men watched her go out of the room in silence. Then Alec turned to Roger.</p>
			<p>“Look here,” he said heatedly, “I’m not going to let you bully that poor little woman like this. It’s a bit too thick. You get a lot of damned silly notions into your head about her, and then you try to bully her into confirming them. I’m not going to stand for it.”</p>
			<p>Roger shook his head in mock despair.</p>
			<p>“Really, Alexander,” he said tragically, “you are a difficult person, you know. Extraordinarily difficult.”</p>
			<p>“Well, it’s getting past a joke,” Alec retorted a little more calmly, though his face was still flushed with anger. “We can do what we want without bullying women.”</p>
			<p>“And just when I was getting along so nicely!” Roger mourned. “You make a rotten Watson, Alec. I can’t think why I ever took you on in the part.”</p>
			<p>“A jolly good thing for you that you did,” Alec said grimly. “I can see fair play, at any rate. And trying to trick a woman who’s got nothing to do with the thing at all into a lot of silly admissions is <em>not</em> playing the game.”</p>
			<p>Roger took the other’s arm and led him gently into the garden.</p>
			<p>“All right, all right,” he said in the tones of one soothing a fractious child. “We’ll try other tactics, if you’re so set on it. In any case, there’s no need to get excited. The trouble is that you’ve mistaken your century, Alec. You ought to have lived four or five hundred years ago. As a heavyweight succourer of ladies in distress you could have challenged all comers with one lance tied behind your back. There, there!”</p>
			<p>“Oh, it’s all very well for you to laugh,” returned the slightly mollified Alec, “but I’m perfectly right, and you know it. If we’re going on with this thing, we’re not going to make use of any dashed underhand sneaky little detective tricks. If it comes to that, why don’t you tackle Jefferson, if you’re so jolly keen on tackling someone?”</p>
			<p>“For the simple reason that the excellent Jefferson would certainly not give anything away, my dear Alec; whereas there’s always the chance that a woman will. But enough! We’ll confine ourselves to sticks and stones, and leave the human element out of account; or the feminine part of it, at any rate. But for all that,” Roger added wistfully, “I <em>would</em> like to know what’s going on amongst that trio!”</p>
			<p>“Humph!” Alec grunted disapprovingly.</p>
			<p>They paced for a time in silence up and down the edge of the lawn, which ran parallel with the back of the house.</p>
			<p>Roger’s thoughts were racing. The disappearance of the footprints had caused him drastically to rearrange his ideas. He had now no doubt at all that Jefferson not only knew all about the crime itself, but that he was in all probability an actual participator in it. Whether his part had been an active one and he had been present in the library at the time, was impossible to say; probably not, Roger inclined to think. But that he had helped to plan it and was now actively concerned in endeavouring to destroy all traces of it was surely beyond all disbelief. That meant one accomplice, at least, within the house.</p>
			<p>But what was really worrying Roger far more than the question of Jefferson’s share in the affair was the possible inclusion of the two women who seemed somehow to be mixed up with it. On the face of things no doubt it was, as Alec so strongly held, almost incredible that either <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant or Lady Stanworth could be a party to a murder. Yet it was impossible to dispute the facts. That there was a distinct understanding between Jefferson and Lady Stanworth seemed as certain to Roger as that there had been a murder in the house instead of a suicide. And a similar understanding between <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant and Jefferson appeared to be even more strongly established. Added to which there was her suspicious behaviour in the library that morning; for in spite of the fact that her jewels had been in the safe, after all, Roger was still no less firmly convinced that this excuse for her presence in the library was a lie. Furthermore, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant certainly knew very much more about Stanworth and his relations with his secretary and sister-in-law than she was willing to admit; it was a pity that she had checked herself just in time after tea, when she appeared to have been on the point of allowing something of real importance to slip past her guard.</p>
			<p>Yes; though he was no more willing to believe it than was Alec himself, Roger could see no loophole through which to escape from the assumption that both <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant and Lady Stanworth were as deeply implicated as Jefferson himself. It was most unfortunate that Alec should have chosen to adopt such a highly prejudiced view of the matter; this was just the sort of thing for which nothing was required so much as impartial discussion. Roger covertly eyed the face of his taciturn companion and sighed softly.</p>
			<p>The back of the house did not run in a single straight line. Between the library and the dining room, where was the small room which was used for storing trunks and lumber, the wall was set back a few feet and formed a shallow recess; and this space was occupied by a little shrubbery of laurels. As the two passed this shrubbery, a small blue object, lying on the ground at the outer edge, caught the sun’s rays and the gleam of it attracted Roger’s attention. Carelessly and half unconsciously, he strolled towards it.</p>
			<p>Then something in its particular shade of blue struck a sudden note in his memory, and he stared at it curiously.</p>
			<p>“What’s that little blue thing by the roots of those laurels, Alec?” he asked, frowning at it. “It seems vaguely familiar somehow.”</p>
			<p>He stepped across the path and picked it up. It was a piece of blue china.</p>
			<p>“Hullo!” he said eagerly, holding it up so that Alec could see it. “Do you realise what this is?”</p>
			<p>Alec joined him on the path and looked at the piece of china without very much interest.</p>
			<p>“Yes, it’s a bit of broken plate or something.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no, it isn’t! Don’t you recognise the colour? It’s a bit of the missing vase, my boy. I wonder⁠—By Jove, I wonder if the rest is in here.”</p>
			<p>He dropped on his hands and knees and peered among the laurels. “Yes, I believe I can see some other bits farther in. I’ll investigate, if you’ll keep an eye open to see that nobody is coming.” And he crawled laboriously into the little shrubbery.</p>
			<p>A few moments later he returned by the same route. In his hands were several more pieces of the vase.</p>
			<p>“It’s all in there,” he announced triumphantly. “Right back by the wall. You see what must have happened?”</p>
			<p>“The fellow threw it in there,” said Alec wisely.</p>
			<p>“Exactly. I expect he put the pieces in his pocket when he collected them, in order to chuck them away somewhere as soon as he got clear. Methodical sort of bird, isn’t he?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” Alec agreed, looking at Roger with some surprise. “You seem quite excited about it.”</p>
			<p>“I am!” Roger said emphatically.</p>
			<p>“Why? It’s what we expected, isn’t it? More or less. I mean, if the vase was broken and the pieces disappeared, it’s a pretty reasonable assumption that he threw them away somewhere, isn’t it?”</p>
			<p>Roger’s eyes sparkled. “Oh, perfectly. But the point is <em>where</em> he threw them. Doesn’t it occur to you, Alec, that this place is not on the route between the lattice window and the quickest way out of the grounds? In other words, the drive. Also, doesn’t it occur to you that if he wanted to throw them where nobody would be likely to find them, the best place to do it would be that thick undergrowth on either side of the drive⁠—especially as he would be passing along it on his way out? Don’t those points seem rather significant to you?”</p>
			<p>“Well, perhaps it is a little curious, now you come to mention it.”</p>
			<p>“A little curious!” Roger repeated disgustedly. “My dear chap, it’s one of the most significant things we’ve struck yet. What’s the inference? I don’t say it’s correct, by the way. But what <em>is</em> the inference?”</p>
			<p>Alec pondered.</p>
			<p>“That he was in a deuce of a hurry?”</p>
			<p>“That he was in a deuce of a fiddlestick! He’d have gone on straight down the drive if that is all. No! The inference to my way of thinking is that he never was going down the drive at all.”</p>
			<p>“Oh? Where was he going, then?”</p>
			<p>“Back into the house again! Alec, it’s beginning to look as if that Mysterious Stranger of ours may be going the same way as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> John Prince.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
