<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIV: Mr. Sheringham Is Disconcerted</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sheringham Is Disconcerted</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Roger sat through the first part of lunch in a species of minor trance. It was not until the necessity for consuming a large plateful of prunes and tapioca pudding, the two things besides Jews that he detested most in the world, began to impress itself upon his consciousness, that the power of connected thought returned to him. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant’s revelation appeared temporarily to have numbed his brain. The one thing which remained dazzlingly clear to him was that if Stanworth had written a letter announcing his impending suicide, then Stanworth could not after all have been murdered; and the whole imposing structure which he, Roger, had erected, crumbled away into the sand upon which it had been founded. It was a disturbing reflection for one so blithely certain of himself as Roger.</p>
			<p>As soon as lunch was over and the discussion regarding trains and the like at an end, he hurried Alec upstairs to his bedroom to talk the matter over. It is true that Roger felt a certain reluctance to be compelled thus to acknowledge that he had been busily unearthing nothing but a mare’s nest; but, on the other hand, Alec must know sooner or later, and at that moment the one vital necessity from Roger’s point of view was to talk. In fact, the pent-up floods of talk in Roger’s bosom that were striving for exit had been causing him something very nearly approaching physical pain during the last few minutes.</p>
			<p>“Alexander!” he exclaimed dramatically as soon as the door was safely shut. “Alexander, the game is up!”</p>
			<p>“What do you mean?” Alec asked in surprise. “Have the police got on the trail now?”</p>
			<p>“Worse than that. Far worse! It appears that old Stanworth was never murdered at all! He did commit suicide, after all.”</p>
			<p>Alec sat down heavily in the nearest chair. “Good Lord!” he exclaimed limply. “But what on earth makes you think that? I thought you were so convinced that it was murder.”</p>
			<p>“So I was,” Roger said, leaning against the dressing table. “That’s what makes it all the more extraordinary, because I really am very seldom wrong. I say it in all modesty, but the fact is indisputable. By all the laws of average, Stanworth ought to have been murdered. It really is most inexplicable.”</p>
			<p>“But how do you know he wasn’t?” Alec demanded. “What’s happened since I saw you last to make you alter your mind like this?”</p>
			<p>“The simple fact that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant received a note from old Stanworth, saying that he was going to kill himself for private reasons of his own or something.”</p>
			<p>“Oh!”</p>
			<p>“I can tell you, it knocked me upside down for the minute. Anything more unexpected I couldn’t have imagined. And the trouble is that I don’t see how we can possibly get round it. A note like that is a very different matter to that statement.”</p>
			<p>“You know, I’m not sure that I’m altogether surprised that something like this has turned up,” Alec said slowly. “I was never quite so convinced by the murder idea as you were. After all, when you come to look at all the facts of the case, although they certainly seemed to be consistent with murder, were no less consistent with suicide, weren’t they?”</p>
			<p>“So it appears,” Roger said regretfully.</p>
			<p>“It was simply that you’d got the notion of murder into your head⁠—more picturesque, I suppose⁠—and everything had to be construed to fit it, eh?”</p>
			<p>“I suppose so.”</p>
			<p>“In fact,” Alec concluded wisely, “it was an <i xml:lang="fr">idée fixe</i>, and everything else was sacrificed to it. Isn’t that right?”</p>
			<p>“Alexander, you put me to shame,” Roger murmured.</p>
			<p>“Well, anyhow, that shows you what comes of muddling in other people’s affairs,” Alec pointed out severely. “And it’s lucky you hit on the truth before you made a still bigger idiot of yourself.”</p>
			<p>“I deserve it all, I know,” Roger remarked contritely to his hairbrush.</p>
			<p>It was Alec’s turn to be complacent now, and he was taking full advantage of it. As he lay back leisurely in his chair and smoked away placidly, he presented a perfect picture of “I told you so!” Roger contemplated him in rueful silence.</p>
			<p>“And yet⁠—!” he murmured tentatively, after a few moments’ silence.</p>
			<p>Alec waved an admonitory pipe.</p>
			<p>“Now, then!” he said warningly.</p>
			<p>Roger exploded suddenly. “Well, say what you like, Alec,” he burst out, “but the thing is dashed queer! You can’t get away from it. After all, our inquiries haven’t resulted in nothing, have they? We did establish the fact that Stanworth was a blackmailer. I forgot to tell you that, by the way. We were perfectly right; he had been blackmailing <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant, the swine, and jolly badly, too. Incidentally, she hadn’t the least idea that his death might be anything else than suicide, and Jefferson didn’t come into the library while she was there; so I was wrong in that particular detail. I’m satisfied she was telling the truth, too. But as for the rest⁠—well, I’m dashed if I know what to think! The more I consider it, the more difficult I find it to believe that it was suicide, after all, and that all those other facts could have been nothing but mere coincidences. It isn’t reasonable.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, that’s all very well,” Alec said sagely. “But when a fellow actually goes out of his way to write a letter saying that⁠—”</p>
			<p>“By Jove, Alec!” Roger interrupted excitedly. “You’ve given me an idea. <em>Did</em> he write it?”</p>
			<p>“What do you mean?”</p>
			<p>“Why, mightn’t it have been typed? I haven’t seen the thing yet, you know, and when she mentioned a letter it never occurred to me that it might not be a handwritten one. If it was typed, then there’s still a chance.” He walked rapidly towards the door.</p>
			<p>“Where are you going to now?” Alec asked in surprise.</p>
			<p>“To see if I can get a look at this blessed letter,” Roger said, turning the handle. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant’s room is down this passage, isn’t it?”</p>
			<p>With a quick glance up and down the passage, Roger hurried along to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant’s bedroom and tapped on the door.</p>
			<p>“Come in,” said a voice inside.</p>
			<p>“It’s me, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant,” he replied softly. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sheringham. Can I speak to you a minute?”</p>
			<p>There came the sound of rapid footsteps crossing the floor and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant’s head appeared at the door.</p>
			<p>“Yes?” she asked, not without a certain apprehension. “What is it, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sheringham?”</p>
			<p>“You remember that letter you mentioned this morning? From <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stanworth, I mean. Have you still got it, by any chance, or have you destroyed it?”</p>
			<p>He held his breath for her reply.</p>
			<p>“Oh, no. Of course I destroyed it at once. Why?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I just wanted to test an idea. Let me see.” He thought rapidly. “It was pushed under your door or something, I suppose?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no. It came by post.”</p>
			<p>“Did it?” said Roger eagerly. “You didn’t notice the postmark, did you?”</p>
			<p>“As a matter of fact I did. It seemed so funny that he should have taken the trouble to post it. It was posted from the village by the eight-thirty post that morning.”</p>
			<p>“The village, was it? Oh! And was it typewritten?”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>Roger held his breath again. “Was the signature written or typewritten?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant considered.</p>
			<p>“It was typewritten, as far as I remember.”</p>
			<p>“Are you sure of that?” Roger asked eagerly.</p>
			<p>“Ye-es, I think so. Oh, yes; I remember now. The whole thing was typewritten, signature and all.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you very much, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant,” Roger said gratefully. “That’s all I wanted to know.”</p>
			<p>He sped back to his own room.</p>
			<p>“Alexander!” he exclaimed dramatically, as soon as he was inside. “Alexander, the game is on again!”</p>
			<p>“What’s up now?” Alec asked with a slight frown.</p>
			<p>“That letter sounds like a fake, just the same as the confession. It was all typewritten, even the signature, and it was posted from the village. Can you imagine a man in his sane senses deliberately going down to the village to post his letter, when all he had to do was to push it under her door?”</p>
			<p>“He might have had others to post as well,” Alec hazarded, blowing out a great cloud of smoke. “Would <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant’s be the only one?”</p>
			<p>“H’m! I never thought of that. Yes, he would. But still, it’s rather unlikely that he should have posted hers as well, I should say. By the way, it was that letter which accounted for her change of attitude before lunch. She knew then that she had nothing to fear from the opening of the safe, you see.”</p>
			<p>“Well, how do matters stand now?”</p>
			<p>“Exactly as they did before. I don’t see that this really affects it either way. It’s only another instance of the murderer’s cunning. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant, and possibly, as you say, one or two others, might raise awkward questions at Stanworth’s sudden death; therefore their apprehensions must be allayed. All that it really does as far as we are concerned, is to confirm the idea that the murderer must have a very intimate knowledge of Stanworth’s private affairs. Of course it shows that the safe <em>was</em> opened that night, and it brings our old friends, the ashes in the hearth, into prominence once more as being in all probability the remains of the blackmailer’s evidence. Curious that that first guess of mine should have turned out to be so near the truth, isn’t it?”</p>
			<p>“And what about Jefferson?” Alec asked quietly.</p>
			<p>“Ah, yes, Jefferson. Well, I suppose this affair of the letter and the fact that he did not break in on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant and Stanworth in the library that night and consequently was not helped by that lady⁠—I suppose all this gives him credit for rather more brains than I had been willing to concede him; but otherwise I don’t see that his position is affected.”</p>
			<p>“You mean, you still think he killed Stanworth?”</p>
			<p>“If he didn’t, can you tell me who did?”</p>
			<p>Alec shrugged his shoulders. “I’ve told you I’m convinced you’re barking up the wrong tree. It’s no good going on repeating it.”</p>
			<p>“Not a bit,” Roger said cheerfully.</p>
			<p>“So what are you going to do?”</p>
			<p>“Exactly what I was before. Have a little chat with him.”</p>
			<p>“Rather ticklish business, isn’t it? I mean, when you’re so very uncertain of your ground.”</p>
			<p>“Possibly. But so was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant for that matter. I think I shall be able to handle friend Jefferson all right. I shall be perfectly candid with him, and I’m willing to wager a small sum that I shall be back here within half an hour with his confession in my pocket.”</p>
			<p>“Humph!” Alec observed sceptically. “Are you going to accuse him directly of the murder?”</p>
			<p>“My dear Alec! Nothing so crude as that. I shan’t even say in so many words that I know a murder has been committed. I shall simply ask him a few pointed and extremely pertinent questions. He’ll see the drift of them all right; Master Jefferson is no fool, as we have every reason to know. Then we shall be able to get down to things.”</p>
			<p>“Well, for goodness’ sake do bear in mind the possibility (I won’t put it any stronger than that) that Jefferson never did kill Stanworth at all, and walk warily.”</p>
			<p>“Trust me for that,” Roger replied complacently. “By the way, did I tell you that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant received that letter just before going into lunch? It caught the eight-thirty post from the village.”</p>
			<p>“Did it?” Alec said without very much interest.</p>
			<p>“By Jove!” Roger exclaimed suddenly. “What an idiot I am! That’s conclusive proof that Stanworth couldn’t have posted it himself, isn’t it? Fancy my never spotting that point before!”</p>
			<p>“What point?”</p>
			<p>“Why, the first post out from the village is five o’clock. That letter must have been posted between five and eight-thirty⁠—four hours or more after Stanworth was dead!”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
