<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X: Mrs. Plant Is Apprehensive</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h2>
				<p epub:type="title"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant Is Apprehensive</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>“Great Scott!” Alec exclaimed, considerably startled. “Find the murderer?”</p>
			<p>Roger seemed pleased with the impression he had made. “Naturally. What else? It’s the logical sequel to what we’ve already done, isn’t it?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I suppose so,” Alec hesitated, “if you put it like that. But⁠—Well, we seem to be getting on so jolly fast. I mean, it’s rather difficult to realise that a murder’s been committed at all. It all seems so impossible, you know.”</p>
			<p>“That’s simply because it’s something foreign to your usual experience of life,” Roger said thoughtfully. “I admit that it is a bit of a shock at first to face the fact that Stanworth was murdered instead of committing suicide. But that’s not because there’s anything inherently improbable about murder itself. Murder’s a common enough event if it comes to that. But it doesn’t generally take place among the circle of one’s immediate friends; that’s the trouble. Anyhow, there’s no getting over it in this case. If ever a man was murdered, Stanworth was. And very cleverly murdered, too. I tell you, Alec, it’s no ordinary criminal we’re after. It’s an extraordinarily cool, brainy, and calculating sort of person indeed.”</p>
			<p>“Calculating?” Alec repeated. “Then do you think it was premeditated?”</p>
			<p>“Impossible to say, as yet. But I should certainly imagine so. It looks as if it had been very carefully thought out beforehand, doesn’t it?”</p>
			<p>“There doesn’t seem to have been much left to chance,” Alec agreed.</p>
			<p>“And look at the deliberation of the fellow. Fancy stopping to collect those bits of vase and cover up the traces of that second shot like that! He must have some nerve. Yes, it certainly looks more and more as if it was a prearranged thing. I don’t say for last night in particular; that may only have been a favourable opportunity which the chap was quick to seize. But I do think that he’d made up his mind to kill Stanworth some time or other.”</p>
			<p>“You think it was somebody Stanworth knew, then?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, there’s not much doubt about that. And somebody he was vastly afraid of, too, I should imagine. Why else should he keep a revolver so handy, if he wasn’t expecting something of the kind? Yes, that’s the line we ought to go on⁠—see if we can discover whether there was anybody among his acquaintances of whom Stanworth was thoroughly frightened. If we can only find that out, and the name of the person as well, the odds are ten to one that we shall have solved the mystery of the murderer’s identity.”</p>
			<p>“That sounds reasonable enough,” said Alec with interest. “Got any theory of how it was done?”</p>
			<p>Roger beamed. “I believe I can tell you exactly how it was done,” he said, not without pride. “Listen!”</p>
			<p>He recounted at some length the results of his after-lunch meditations and explained the reasons upon which his conclusions had been based. It took the two of them several circuits of the rose garden before the recital was completed, and then Roger turned expectantly to his companion.</p>
			<p>“You see?” he concluded eagerly. “That accounts for everything except the facts of the confession and the murderer’s escape from the library. Now I’ve cleared up the confession, and we’ve only got one difficulty to get over. What do you think of it?”</p>
			<p>“Humph!” observed Alec cautiously. He paused, and it was evident that he was thinking deeply.</p>
			<p>“Well?” asked Roger impatiently.</p>
			<p>“There’s one thing I don’t quite see,” Alec said slowly. “According to you the shot that killed Stanworth was fired from the other man’s revolver. Then how is it that the bullet they took out of his head fitted the empty shell in his <em>own</em> revolver?”</p>
			<p>Roger’s face fell. “Hullo!” he exclaimed. “That never occurred to me.”</p>
			<p>“I thought it couldn’t have,” said Alec complacently. “That rather knocks your theory on the head, doesn’t it?”</p>
			<p>“It’s one to you, Watson, certainly,” Roger smiled a little ruefully.</p>
			<p>“Ah!” observed Alec deeply. He was evidently not going to spoil the impression he had just made by any rash remarks. Alec was one of those fortunate people who know just when to stop.</p>
			<p>“Still, after all,” Roger said slowly, “that’s only a matter of detail, isn’t it? My version of how it happened may be quite wrong. But that doesn’t affect the main issue, which is that it <em>was</em> done.”</p>
			<p>“In other words, the fact of murder is definitely established, you think, although you don’t know how it was carried out?” Alec asked thoughtfully.</p>
			<p>“Precisely.”</p>
			<p>“Humph! And do you still think the motive was robbery?”</p>
			<p>“I do. And⁠—By Jove!” Roger stopped suddenly in his stride and turned exultantly to his companion. “That may account for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant, too!”</p>
			<p>“What about <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant?”</p>
			<p>“Well, didn’t you notice her at lunch? She was as cheerful and unconcerned as anything. Rather a change from the very perturbed person we surprised at the safe this morning, wasn’t it? And on the face of it you’d have expected her to be still more worried, with the prospect of the opening of the safe this afternoon and the proving of her little story to us to be false. But was she? Not a bit of it. She looked as if she hadn’t a trouble in the world. You must have noticed it.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I did, now you come to mention it. I thought she must be acting.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant wasn’t acting at lunch any more than she was telling the truth to us this morning,” said Roger with conviction. “And why wasn’t she? Because for some mysterious reason or other she had no need to be. In other words, she knew that when the safe was opened this afternoon, everything would be all right as far as she was concerned.”</p>
			<p>“How on earth did she know that?”</p>
			<p>“I wish I could tell you. But consider. If the safe had been robbed last night, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant’s jewels would have disappeared with the other valuables, wouldn’t they? That is, assuming that they had ever been there. Well, there’s her answer to us. ‘Oh, yes, my jewels <em>were</em> there, and that’s why I wanted to get at the safe; but they’ve been stolen with everything else, and that’s why they’re not there now.’ See?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, but what I want to know is, how did she find out that the safe had been robbed and her story to us would hold water after all?”</p>
			<p>“And that’s exactly what I want to know, too, my excellent Alec. If we only knew that, we should have advanced a long way to the solution of the mystery. All that we can say definitely is that, some time between our finding her in the library and lunch time, information must have reached her about what happened to the safe last night. It seems to me that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant is going to find herself in a very awkward position rather soon.”</p>
			<p>“But why do you think <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant wanted to open the safe this morning, if there’s no truth in her tale?”</p>
			<p>“Obviously there must have been something inside that she badly wanted to get hold of. Equally obviously she now either has got hold of it, or knows that it’s in safe keeping. And then we get back to Jefferson again. He’s been going through exactly the same sequence of emotions as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant. What do you make of that?”</p>
			<p>“Surely you’re not suggesting that Jefferson and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant are in league together, are you?”</p>
			<p>“What other conclusion is there? They’re both anxious to get something out of that safe before the police open it, and they’re both palpably worried to death over something. Yet at one o’clock they’re both smiling away to themselves as if a tremendous load had been taken off their minds. I’m afraid that they’re not only in league with each other, but with a mysterious third person as well. How else can you account for their behaviour?”</p>
			<p>“Good Lord! You don’t mean that they’re acting with⁠—with the murderer, do you?”</p>
			<p>“It looks to me uncommonly like it,” said Roger gravely. “After all, he’s the only person, so far as we know, who could have enlightened them about the safe.”</p>
			<p>“But it’s out of the question!” Alec burst out impulsively. “Jefferson⁠—I don’t know anything about him, though I should certainly have set him down as quite a decent fellow and a sahib, even if he is a bit reserved. But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant! My dear chap, you’re absolutely off the rails there. Of all the obviously straightforward and honest people in the world, I should have said that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant was the most. Oh, you <em>must</em> be on the wrong tack!”</p>
			<p>“I only wish I were,” Roger returned seriously. “Three hours ago I should have said that the idea of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant being mixed up in a murder was not only unthinkable, but ludicrous. I’ve always thought her a charming woman, and, as you say, absolutely sincere. Certainly not a happy woman (one doesn’t know anything about that husband of hers, by the way; he may be a bad egg); in fact, a woman with a good deal of sorrow in her life, I should say. But absolutely as straight as a die. Yet what can one think now? Facts speak louder than opinions. And the facts are only too plain.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t care,” said Alec obstinately. “If you’re trying to mix <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant up in this affair, you’re making a hopeless mistake, Roger. That’s all I’ve got to say.”</p>
			<p>“I hope you’re right, Alec,” Roger said dryly. “By the way, I think I want to have a word with the lady. Oh, I’m not going to tax her with the murder or anything,” he added with a smile, observing the look on Alec’s face. “But I think she said at lunch that she was expecting to leave here this afternoon. Of course that’s out of the question. She was the last person to see Stanworth alive, and she’ll be wanted to give evidence at the inquest. The inspector must have forgotten to tell her. Let’s go and see what she’s got to say about it.”</p>
			<p>Somewhat unwillingly Alec accompanied Roger on his quest. He did not attempt to make any secret of his distaste for this aspect of his new role. To hunt down a man who deserves no mercy and expects none is one thing; to hunt down a charming lady is very much another.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant was sitting in a garden chair on a shady part of the lawn. There was a book in her lap, but she was staring abstractedly at the grass before her and her thoughts were evidently very far away. Hearing their footsteps she glanced up quickly and greeted the two with her usual quiet, rather sad smile.</p>
			<p>“Have you come to tell me that Inspector Mansfield has arrived?” she asked, perfectly naturally.</p>
			<p>Roger threw himself casually on the ground just in front of her.</p>
			<p>“No, he hasn’t come yet,” he replied easily. “Very hot out here, isn’t it?”</p>
			<p>“I suppose it is. But the heat doesn’t worry me, I’m glad to say. I had enough of it in the Sudan to inure me to anything that this country can produce.”</p>
			<p>“You’re lucky then. Alec, why on earth don’t you lie down and be comfortable? Never stand up when you can sit down instead. By the way, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant, I suppose you’ll be staying over for the inquest tomorrow, won’t you?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no. I shall be off this afternoon, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sheringham.”</p>
			<p>Roger glanced up. “But surely you’ll be wanted to give evidence? You were the last person to see him alive, weren’t you? In the hall, you know?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I⁠—I don’t think I shall be needed, shall I?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant asked apprehensively, paling slightly. “The inspector didn’t⁠—he didn’t say anything about it.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps he didn’t know then that you were the last person,” said Roger carelessly, but watching her narrowly. “And afterwards he must have forgotten to warn you; or else he was intending to do so this afternoon. But they’re certain to need you, you know.”</p>
			<p>It was very clear that this piece of news was highly unwelcome. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant’s hand was trembling in her lap, and she was biting her lip in an effort to retain her self-control.</p>
			<p>“Do you really think so?” she asked, in a voice that she strove desperately to render unconcerned. “But I haven’t got anything of⁠—of any importance to tell, you know.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no, of course not,” Roger said reassuringly. “It’s only a matter of form, you know. You’ll just have to repeat what you told the inspector this morning.”</p>
			<p>“Will they⁠—Are they likely to ask me any questions, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sheringham?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant asked, with a little laugh.</p>
			<p>“Oh, they may ask you one or two, perhaps. Nothing very dreadful.”</p>
			<p>“I see. What sort of questions, would you imagine?”</p>
			<p>“About <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stanworth’s manner, probably. Whether he was cheerful, and all that. And of course they’ll want to know what he spoke to you about.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, that was nothing,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant replied quickly. “Just about⁠—Oh, nothing of any importance whatever. Er⁠—you will be giving evidence, too, won’t you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sheringham?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, unfortunately.”</p>
			<p>Only the white knuckles of her clenched hand gave any hint of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant’s feelings as she asked lightly enough, “And you’re not going to give me away over that absurd panic of mine about my jewels this morning, are you? You promised, didn’t you?”</p>
			<p>“Of course not!” said Roger easily. “Wouldn’t dream of it!”</p>
			<p>“Not even if they ask you?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant persisted, with a nervous little laugh.</p>
			<p>“How could they ask me?” Roger smiled. “Nobody knows anything about it except us three. Besides, I shouldn’t think of giving you away.”</p>
			<p>“Nor you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Grierson?” she asked, turning to Alec.</p>
			<p>Alec flushed slightly. “Naturally not,” he said awkwardly.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Plant fumbled with the handkerchief in her hand and surreptitiously wiped her mouth.</p>
			<p>“Thank you so much, both of you,” she said in a low voice.</p>
			<p>Roger jumped suddenly to his feet.</p>
			<p>“Hullo!” he exclaimed, putting an end to a difficult pause. “Isn’t that the inspector just going up to the front door? Let’s go in and watch the safe being opened, shall we?”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
